[ENH][BEP028] Specification update for BEP028 BIDS-Prov (#2099)
bids-standard/bids-specification: src/modality-agnostic-files/provenance.md

    the [BIDS examples repository](https://bids-website.readthedocs.io/en/latest/datasets/examples.html#provenance).

## Overview

### Goals

This part of the BIDS specification is aimed at describing the provenance of a BIDS dataset. This description is retrospective: it describes a set of steps that were executed in order to obtain the dataset (this is different from prospective descriptions of workflows that could for instance list all sets of steps that can be run on this dataset).

### Principles for encoding provenance in BIDS

-   Provenance information SHOULD be included in a BIDS dataset when possible.
-   If provenance records are included, these MUST be described using the conventions detailed by this specification.
-   Provenance records MAY be used to reflect the provenance of a full dataset and/or of specific files at any level of the BIDS hierarchy.
-   Provenance information SHOULD be de-identified as necessary.

### Definitions

**Provenance record**: provenance metadata consists in sets of records. These provenance records can be of 4 types:

-   `Activity`: Activities represent the transformations that have been applied to the data.

> -   `Entity`: Entities represent input or output data for Activities.

Author: In this definitions section, I did not apply the exact changes you suggested (but it still goes in the same direction). Please let me know if its ok.

-   `Software`: The Software record describes a software package.
-   `Environment`: Environments specify the software environment in which the provenance record was obtained.

Provenance records are described as JSON objects in BIDS. This is detailed in the [Provenance files section](#provenance-files).

!!! example
    The following graph represents examples of links between provenance records. In this example, `Entities` *sub-001_brainmask.nii* and *sub-001_T1w.nii* represent files used by `Activity` *Brain extraction* to generate another file represented by `Entity` *sub-001_T1w_preproc.nii*. `Activities` *Brain extraction* and *Move to MNI* were associated with the `Software` *FSL* and used `Environment` *Linux* as a software environment.

>     ![](../images/provenance_definitions_graph.png)

Reviewer: is there a way to ship an original graph or ideally a collection of prov files + script to produce such a graph?

Author: For now, the `bids_prov.merge` and `bids_prov.visualize` python modules are available in https://github.com/bids-standard/BEP028_BIDSprov/, to produce such a graph from a collection of prov files.
Would you like to have the prov files for this minimal example inside bids examples ?

**Provenance group**: refers to a collection of provenance records corresponding to a consistent set of processings. Defining multiple provenance groups is appropriate when separate sets of processings have been performed on data, and that they differ in purpose or chronology.

## Provenance in sidecar JSON files

> Provenance metadata CAN be stored inside the sidecar JSON of any BIDS file (or BIDS-Derivatives file) it applies to.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Provenance metadata CAN be stored inside the sidecar JSON of any BIDS file it applies to.
```

I do not see a point of "or" here.

This metadata only describes the provenance of the BIDS file.

> Any sidecar JSON file CAN include the following keys:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any sidecar JSON file MAY include the following keys:
```

per https://bids-specification--2099.org.readthedocs.build/en/2099/common-principles.html#definitions where no `CAN` is defined . Change here and elsewhere in the text

<!-- This block generates a metadata table.
The definitions of these fields can be found in
  src/schema/objects/metadata.yaml
and a guide for using macros can be found at
 https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/blob/master/macros_doc.md
-->
{{ MACROS___make_metadata_table(
   {
      "GeneratedById": "OPTIONAL",
      "SidecarGeneratedBy": "OPTIONAL",
      "Digest": "OPTIONAL",
      "EntityType": "OPTIONAL"
   }
) }}

> No other field is allowed to describe provenance inside sidecar JSON files.

Reviewer: ATM sidecar is "open" for defining any other field and some software might...   hence I would just remove this

```suggestion
```

related
- https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/issues/637
- https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-2-devel/issues/80

!!! note

>     Not defining the `SidecarGenearatedBy` field means that the sidecar JSON was generated by the `Activity` described in the `GenearatedBy` field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Not defining the `SidecarGenearatedBy` field means that the sidecar JSON was generated by the same `Activity` as the data file itself and described in the `GenearatedBy` field.
```
to clarify?

!!! example
    Provenance metadata in a sidecar JSON file:
    ```JSON
    {
        "GeneratedBy": "bids::prov#conversion-00f3a18f",
        "SidecarGeneratedBy": [
            "bids::prov#preparation-conversion-1xkhm1ft",
            "bids::prov#conversion-00f3a18f"
        ],
        "Digest": {
            "sha256": "66eeafb465559148e0222d4079558a8354eb09b9efabcc47cd5b8af6eed51907"
        }
    }
    ```
    This snippet is derived from the following comprehensive example: [Provenance records for DICOM to Nifti conversion using `heudiconv`](https://github.com/bclenet/bids-examples/tree/BEP028_heudiconv/provenance_heudiconv).

## Provenance at dataset level

> Provenance metadata CAN be stored inside the `dataset_description.json` of any BIDS dataset (or BIDS-Derivatives dataset) it applies to.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Provenance metadata MAY be stored inside the `dataset_description.json` of any BIDS dataset (or BIDS-Derivatives dataset) it applies to.
```

This metadata describes the provenance of the whole dataset.

The `dataset_description.json` file of a BIDS dataset CAN include the following key to describe provenance:

<!-- This block generates a metadata table.
The definitions of these fields can be found in
  src/schema/objects/metadata.yaml
and a guide for using macros can be found at
 https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/blob/master/macros_doc.md
-->
{{ MACROS___make_metadata_table(
   {
      "GeneratedBy": "RECOMMENDED"
   }
) }}

> The `dataset_description.json` file of a BIDS-Derivatives dataset MUST include the following key to describe provenance:

Reviewer: this is from the "common-principles", so  better be referred to it?

Author: Do you suggest to remove all metadata tables from the _Provenance at dataset level_ section because these metadata are already listed in `src/modality-agnostic-files/dataset-description.json` ?

Reviewer 2: This is not duplication, the suggestion is to move all the provenance-related info (including how to write our GeneratedBy) from common-principles into Provenance. See https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/pull/2099#discussion_r2352530874

        "Activities": [
            {
                "Id": "bids::prov/#conversion-00f3a18f",
                "Label": "Dicom to Nifti conversion",
                "Command": "dcm2niix -o . -f sub-%i/anat/sub-%i_T1w sourcedata/dicoms",
                "AssociatedWith": "bids::prov/#dcm2niix-khhkm7u1",
                "Used": [
                    "bids::prov/#fedora-uldfv058",
                    "bids::sourcedata/dicoms"
                ],
                "StartedAtTime": "2025-03-13T10:26:00",
                "EndedAtTime": "2025-03-13T10:26:05"
            }
        ]
    }
    ```
    This snippet is derived from the following comprehensive example: [Provenance records for DICOM to Nifti conversion using `dcm2niix`](https://github.com/bclenet/bids-examples/tree/BEP028_dcm2niix/provenance_dcm2niix).

### `Entity` records

Each `prov/[<label>/]prov-<label>_ent.json` file is a JSON file describing `Entity` records for a provenance group.

!!! Caution
    These files MUST not contain `Entity` records describing data files that are available in the dataset. Use sidecar JSON files instead for this purpose (see [Provenance in sidecar JSON files](#provenance-in-sidecar-json-files)).

>     These files MUST not contain `Entity` records describing the current dataset. Use the `GeneratedBy` field of the `dataset_description.json` files instead for this purpose (see [Provenance at dataset level](#provenance-at-dataset-level)).

Author: This is odd indeed, I rephrased the sentence.

Each file MUST include an `Entities` key:

<!-- This block generates a metadata table.
The definitions of these fields can be found in
  src/schema/objects/metadata.yaml
and a guide for using macros can be found at
 https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/blob/master/macros_doc.md
-->
{{ MACROS___make_metadata_table(
   {
      "Entities": "REQUIRED"
   }
) }}

Each object in the `Entities` array includes the following keys:

<!-- This block generates a table describing subfields within a metadata field.
The definitions of these fields can be found in
  src/schema/objects/metadata.yaml
and a guide for using macros can be found at
 https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/blob/master/macros_doc.md
-->
{{ MACROS___make_subobject_table("metadata.Entities.items") }}

!!! example
    Provenance metadata in a `prov/[<label>/]prov-<label>_ent.json` file:
    ```JSON
    {
        "Entities": [
            {
                "Id": "bids::sub-01/func/sub-01_task-tonecounting_bold.nii",
                "Label": "sub-01_task-tonecounting_bold.nii",

>                 "AtLocation": "sub-01/func/sub-01_task-tonecounting_bold.nii",

Reviewer 3: i meant to use the bids uri here as well.

    ```
    This snippet is an extract of the following comprehensive example: [Provenance records for DICOM to Nifti conversion using `dcm2niix`](https://github.com/bclenet/bids-examples/tree/BEP028_dcm2niix/provenance_dcm2niix)

### `Environment` records

Each `prov/[<label>/]prov-<label>_env.json` file is a JSON file describing `Environment` records for a provenance group.

Each file MUST include a `Environments` key:

<!-- This block generates a metadata table.
The definitions of these fields can be found in
  src/schema/objects/metadata.yaml
and a guide for using macros can be found at
 https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/blob/master/macros_doc.md
-->
{{ MACROS___make_metadata_table(
   {
      "Environments": "REQUIRED"
   }
) }}

Each object in the `Environments` array includes the following keys:

<!-- This block generates a table describing subfields within a metadata field.
The definitions of these fields can be found in
  src/schema/objects/metadata.yaml
and a guide for using macros can be found at
 https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/blob/master/macros_doc.md
-->
{{ MACROS___make_subobject_table("metadata.Environments.items") }}

!!! bug

>     TODO: Environment not currently defined in the context

Reviewer: what to be done about that?

Author: Is there an IRI from PROV-O or from any other ontology we should map with `Enviroment` ?

Reviewer 3: `Environment` is a `prov:Entity`

Reviewer 2: Just realized now that actually in BIDS-Prov, it's easy to differentiate as "Environments" and "Entities" arrays as they are defined using different keywords (although in RDF they both map to prov:Entity) so I think we can keep as is. 

Sorry for the noise!

!!! example "`Entity` naming examples"
    - `bids:ds001734:sub-002/anat/sub-02_T1w.nii`: the `Id` of an `Entity` describing a T1w file for subject `sub-002` in the `ds001734` dataset ;
    - `bids::sub-014/func/sub-014_task-MGT_run-01_events.tsv`: the `Id` of an `Entity` describing an events file for subject `sub-014` in the current dataset ;
    - `bids:derivatives:fmriprep/sub-001/func/sub-001_task-MGT_run-01_bold_space-MNI152NLin2009cAsym_preproc.nii.gz`:  the `Id` of an `Entity` describing a bold file for subject `sub-001` in the `derivatives` dataset.

An `Id` identifying `Activity`, `Software`, and `Environment` provenance records described in a BIDS dataset `<dataset>` SHOULD have the following form, where `<label>` is a human readable name for coherently identifying the record and `<uid>` is a unique group of chars:

```text
bids:<dataset>:prov#<label>-<uid>
```

!!! example "`Activity`, `Environment`, `Software` naming examples"
    - `bids:ds001734:prov#conversion-xfMMbHK1`: a conversion `Activity` described inside the `ds001734` dataset;
    - `bids::prov#fedora-uldfv058`: a Fedora based `Environment` described inside the current dataset.

>     - `bids:derivatives:prov#fmriprep-r4kzzMt8`: the fMRIPrep `Software` described inside the `derivatives` dataset.

Reviewer: I feel we would need some very explicit statement about uniqueness of Ids, and enforce that in validator somehow.

```suggestion
    - `bids:derivatives:prov#fmriprep-r4kzzMt8`: the fMRIPrep `Software` described inside the `derivatives` dataset.

An `Id` must be unique, as to identify an instance and thus REQUIRED to be different across entries and different instances MUST have different `Id`s.
```

## Minimal example

> Here is a comprehensive example that considers the following dataset:

Reviewer 2: Hey @satra! Can you give us some more insight on what you mean by "study-level organization". Is this a change in the BIDS spec? Or do you mean a re-organization of the files within a BIDS folder for a given study.

> Here is a comprehensive example that considers the following dataset:

Reviewer 3: here is the relevant doc: https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/common-principles.html#study-dataset this was merged with the recent release.

> Here is a comprehensive example that considers the following dataset:

Author: This PR will allow to describe provenance of any BIDS dataset (may it be in the dataet_description.json, in the prov directory, or in a sidecar). This applies to a study dataset as well as to its nested BIDS datasets. Therefore, @cmaumet and I think there is nothing specific to add about study-level inside the Provenance section of the specification.

<!-- This block generates a file tree.
A guide for using macros can be found at
 https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/blob/master/macros_doc.md
-->
{{ MACROS___make_filetree_example(
    {
        "sourcedata": {
            "dicoms": {
                "...": "",
            },
        },
        "sub-001": {
            "anat": {
                "sub-001_T1w.nii.gz": "",
                "sub-001_T1w.json": ""
            },
        },
        "prov": {
            "prov-dcm2niix_act.json": "",
            "prov-dcm2niix_soft.json": ""
        }
    }
) }}

The following provenance record is defined in `prov/prov-dcm2niix_soft.json`, so its `Id` SHOULD start with `bids:<dataset>:prov#` or `bids::prov#`.

```JSON
{
    "Software": [
        {
            "Id": "bids::prov#dcm2niix-70ug8pl5",
            "Label": "dcm2niix",
            "Version": "v1.1.3"
        }
    ]
}

> ```

Author: I'll rephrase this.
We simply give an example illustrating the _Consistency and uniqueness of Ids_ section here. There is indeed no correlation between the file `prov/prov-dcm2niix_soft.json` and the fact that the Id starts with `bids:<dataset>:prov#`

  src/schema/objects/metadata.yaml
and a guide for using macros can be found at
 https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/blob/master/macros_doc.md
-->
{{ MACROS___make_metadata_table(
   {
      "GeneratedById": "OPTIONAL",
      "SidecarGeneratedBy": "OPTIONAL",
      "Digest": "OPTIONAL",
      "EntityType": "OPTIONAL"
   }
) }}

!!! note
    Not defining the `SidecarGeneratedBy` field means that the sidecar JSON was generated by the same `Activity` as the data file itself and described in the `GenearatedBy` field.

    `SidecarGeneratedBy` MUST explicitly include all activities that modified the sidecar JSON, even if some are already listed in `GeneratedBy`.

## Provenance at dataset level

Provenance metadata MAY be stored inside the `dataset_description.json` of any BIDS dataset (or BIDS-Derivatives dataset) it applies to.
This metadata describes the provenance of the whole dataset.

!!! example
    `GeneratedBy` contents in a `dataset_description.json`:
    ```JSON
    {
        "GeneratedBy": [
            {
                "Name": "fmriprep",
                "Id": "bids::prov#preprocessing-xMpFqB5q"
            }
        ]
    }
    ```

>     This snippet is an extract of the following comprehensive example: [Provenance records for fMRI preprocessing using `fMRIPrep`](https://github.com/bclenet/bids-examples/tree/BEP028_fmriprep/provenance_fmriprep).

Reviewer 3: if we are going to point to a separate repo, we should note that it will have to be maintained after the PR is merged. perhaps something to think about and consider whether these examples are transitioned into bids examples repo and linked here.

!!! example
    Provenance metadata in a sidecar JSON file:
    ```JSON
    {
        "GeneratedBy": "bids::prov#conversion-00f3a18f",
        "SidecarGeneratedBy": [
            "bids::prov#preparation-conversion-1xkhm1ft",
            "bids::prov#conversion-00f3a18f"
        ],
        "Digest": {
            "sha256": "66eeafb465559148e0222d4079558a8354eb09b9efabcc47cd5b8af6eed51907"
        }
    }
    ```
    This snippet is derived from the following comprehensive example: [Provenance records for DICOM to Nifti conversion using `heudiconv`](https://github.com/bclenet/bids-examples/tree/BEP028_heudiconv/provenance_heudiconv).

Any sidecar JSON file MAY include the following keys:

<!-- This block generates a metadata table.
The definitions of these fields can be found in
  src/schema/objects/metadata.yaml
and a guide for using macros can be found at
 https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/blob/master/macros_doc.md
-->
{{ MACROS___make_metadata_table(
   {
      "GeneratedById": "OPTIONAL",
      "SidecarGeneratedBy": "OPTIONAL",
      "Digest": "OPTIONAL",
      "EntityType": "OPTIONAL"
   }
) }}

!!! note

>     Not defining the `SidecarGeneratedBy` field means that the sidecar JSON was generated by the same activity as the data file itself and described in the `GenearatedBy` field.

Reviewer 3: there may be some dual implicitness in the `GeneratedBy` key implying both file+sidecar. so either it should be clarified in the spec or as camille says it should be separated through this notion of the new keyword `SidecarGeneratedBy`

  src/schema/objects/metadata.yaml
and a guide for using macros can be found at
 https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/blob/master/macros_doc.md
-->
{{ MACROS___make_metadata_table(
   {
      "GeneratedBy": "RECOMMENDED"
   }
) }}

The `dataset_description.json` file of a BIDS-Derivatives dataset MUST include the following key to describe provenance:

<!-- This block generates a metadata table.
The definitions of these fields can be found in
  src/schema/objects/metadata.yaml
and a guide for using macros can be found at
 https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/blob/master/macros_doc.md
-->
{{ MACROS___make_metadata_table(
   {
      "GeneratedBy": "REQUIRED"
   }
) }}

Each object in the `GeneratedBy` array includes the following REQUIRED, RECOMMENDED
and OPTIONAL keys:

<!-- This block generates a table describing subfields within a metadata field.
The definitions of these fields can be found in
  src/schema/objects/metadata.yaml
and a guide for using macros can be found at
 https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/blob/master/macros_doc.md
-->
{{ MACROS___make_subobject_table("metadata.GeneratedBy.items") }}

> ## Provenance files

Reviewer 2: Camille stopped her review here ----

Template:

```text
prov/
    [<label>/]
        prov-<label>_act.json
        prov-<label>_ent.json
        prov-<label>_env.json
        prov-<label>_soft.json
```

!!! Note

>     Files sharing the same `prov` BIDS entity contain provenance records that belong to the same provenance group.

Author: As discussed, we will remove the definition for provenance group .

!!! example "Example datasets"

    The following examples have been formatted using this specification
    and can be used for practical guidance when curating a new dataset.

    - [Provenance records for DICOM to Nifti conversion using `dcm2niix`](https://github.com/bclenet/bids-examples/tree/BEP028_dcm2niix/provenance_dcm2niix) - [Associated Pull Request #494](https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-examples/pull/494)
    - [Provenance records for DICOM to Nifti conversion using `heudiconv`](https://github.com/bclenet/bids-examples/tree/BEP028_heudiconv/provenance_heudiconv) - [Associated Pull Request #496](https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-examples/pull/496)
    - [Provenance records for fMRI preprocessing using `SPM`](https://github.com/bclenet/bids-examples/tree/BEP028_spm/provenance_spm) - [Associated Pull Request #497](https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-examples/pull/497)
    - [Provenance records for fMRI preprocessing using `fMRIPrep`](https://github.com/bclenet/bids-examples/tree/BEP028_fmriprep/provenance_fmriprep) - [Associated Pull Request#502](https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-examples/pull/502)

    Further datasets are available from

>     the [BIDS examples repository](https://bids-website.readthedocs.io/en/latest/datasets/examples.html#provenance).

Author: Yes, although I'm not sure why the table is already on the website :thinking:

    and can be used for practical guidance when curating a new dataset.

    - [Provenance of DICOM to Nifti conversion with `dcm2niix`](https://github.com/bclenet/bids-examples/tree/BEP028_dcm2niix/provenance_dcm2niix) - [Associated Pull Request #494](https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-examples/pull/494)
    - [Provenance of DICOM to Nifti conversion with `heudiconv`](https://github.com/bclenet/bids-examples/tree/BEP028_heudiconv/provenance_heudiconv) - [Associated Pull Request #496](https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-examples/pull/496)
    - [Provenance of fMRI preprocessing with `SPM`](https://github.com/bclenet/bids-examples/tree/BEP028_spm/provenance_spm) - [Associated Pull Request #497](https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-examples/pull/497)
    - [Provenance of fMRI preprocessing with `fMRIPrep`](https://github.com/bclenet/bids-examples/tree/BEP028_fmriprep/provenance_fmriprep) - [Associated Pull Request#502](https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-examples/pull/502)

    Further datasets are available from
    the [BIDS examples repository](https://bids-website.readthedocs.io/en/latest/datasets/examples.html#provenance).

> ## Overview

Reviewer 4: I'd remove this heading and move the sentences under it to the above section (#provenance), I think the opening sentences of a page are generally understood to be an overview.

This part of the BIDS specification is aimed at describing the provenance of a BIDS dataset.

This description is retrospective: it describes a set of steps that were executed in order to obtain the dataset.

!!! note
    This is different from prospective provenance that focuses describing workflows that may be run on a dataset.

This description is based on the [W3C Prov](https://www.w3.org/TR/2013/REC-prov-o-20130430/) standard.

> ### General principles

Reviewer 4: These principles could be moved into the top level section, other sections of the standard (behavioral, phenotypic, etc) use requirement keywords in their opening salvos. I'd also remove the new lines between the sentences.

The identifier of a provEntity describing a BIDS file not available in the dataset SHOULD be a [BIDS URI](../common-principles.md#bids-uri) with a fragment part.

!!! warning
    The use of BIDS URIs may require to define the `DatasetLinks` object in [`dataset_description.json`](dataset-description.md#dataset_descriptionjson).

In other cases, the identifier of a provEntity described in a BIDS dataset `<dataset-name>` MAY have the following form, where `<label>` is an arbitrary value for identifying the provEntity.

```text
bids:[<dataset-name>]:prov#provEntity-<label>
```

!!! example "Examples of identifiers for provEntities"
    - `bids:ds001734:sub-002/anat/sub-02_T1w.nii` - a provEntity describing a T1w file for subject `sub-002` in the `ds001734` dataset;
    - `bids::sub-014/func/sub-014_task-MGT_run-01_events.tsv` - a provEntity describing an events file for subject `sub-014` in the current dataset;
    - `bids:fmriprep:sub-001/func/sub-001_task-MGT_run-01_bold_space-MNI152NLin2009cAsym_preproc.nii.gz` - a provEntity describing a bold file for subject `sub-001` in the `fmriprep` dataset;

>     - `bids::prov#provEntity-acea8093` - a provEntity describing a file that is not available in the dataset.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - `bids::prov#provEntity-acea8093` - identifier for a file that is not available in the dataset.
```

### Identifiers for other objects

The identifier of an activity, software, or environment described in a BIDS dataset `<dataset-name>` SHOULD have the following form, where `<label>` is a human readable name for coherently identifying the object and `<uid>` is a unique group of chars.

```text
bids:[<dataset-name>]:prov#<label>-<uid>
```

The uniqueness of this identifier MUST be used to distinguish any activity, software, or environment that are different in any of their attributes.

!!! example "Examples of identifiers for activities, environments and software"
    - `bids:ds001734:prov#conversion-xfMMbHK1` - a conversion activity described inside the `ds001734` dataset;
    - `bids::prov#fedora-uldfv058` - a Fedora based environment described inside the current dataset.
    - `bids:preprocessing:prov#fmriprep-r4kzzMt8` - the fMRIPrep software described inside the `preprocessing` dataset.

## Provenance from an RDF perspective

!!! note

>     The [Resource Description Framework (RDF)](https://www.w3.org/RDF/) is a method to describe and exchange graph data.

Reviewer 2: I think we could remove this note and instead add a parenthesis after "RDF graph" below. See proposed edit

### Software

This section specifies how to describe software packages that computed the [activities](#activities).

Each file with a `soft` suffix is a JSON file describing software. It MUST include the following key:

<!-- This block generates a metadata table.
The definitions of these fields can be found in
  src/schema/objects/metadata.yaml
and a guide for using macros can be found at
 https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/blob/master/macros_doc.md
-->
{{ MACROS___make_metadata_table(
   {
      "Software": "REQUIRED"
   }
) }}

Each object in the `Software` array includes the following keys:

<!-- This block generates a table describing subfields within a metadata field.
The definitions of these fields can be found in
  src/schema/objects/metadata.yaml
and a guide for using macros can be found at
 https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/blob/master/macros_doc.md
-->
{{ MACROS___make_subobject_table("metadata.Software.items") }}

!!! example "Example: description of a software package in a `prov/[<subdir>/]prov-<label>_soft.json` file"

    ```JSON
    {
        "Software": [
            {
                "Id": "bids::prov#dcm2niix-khhkm7u1",

>                 "AltIdentifier": "RRID:SCR_023517",

Reviewer: I would right away

```suggestion
                "AltIdentifiers": ["RRID:SCR_023517"],
```

not sure which one to add here, has no FairSharing one etc

# Provenance

Support for provenance was developed as a [BIDS Extension Proposal](../extensions.md#bids-extension-proposals).
Please see [Citing BIDS](../introduction.md#citing-bids) on how to appropriately credit this extension when referring to it in the
context of the academic literature.

!!! example "Example datasets"

    Several [example BIDS-Prov datasets](https://bids-website.readthedocs.io/en/latest/datasets/examples.html#provenance) have been formatted using this specification and can be used for practical guidance when curating a new dataset.

> This part of the BIDS specification is aimed at describing the provenance of a BIDS dataset. This description is retrospective: it describes a set of steps that were executed in order to establish the dataset and is based on [W3C Prov](https://www.w3.org/TR/2013/REC-prov-o-20130430/) (see [Provenance from an RDF perspective](#provenance-from-a-rdf-perspective)). Note: this is different from prospective provenance that focuses describing workflows that may be run on a dataset.

Reviewer 2: Thanks for your review and for catching this @satra - I second removing the note.

Provenance information SHOULD be included in a BIDS dataset when possible. If provenance information is included, it MUST be described using the conventions detailed hereafter. Provenance information reflects the provenance of a full dataset and/or of specific files at any level of the BIDS hierarchy. Provenance information SHOULD not include human subject identifying data.

## Provenance of a BIDS file

> Provenance of a BIDS file SHOULD be stored inside its sidecar JSON.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Provenance of a BIDS data file SHOULD be stored inside its sidecar JSON.
```

Specifying data files since things like dataset_description.json don't have sidecars but also aren't a sidecar to any other file.

        ],
        "Digest": {
            "SHA-256": "66eeafb465559148e0222d4079558a8354eb09b9efabcc47cd5b8af6eed51907"
        }
    }
    ```
    For a complete example see [Provenance of DICOM to NIfTI conversion with `heudiconv`](https://github.com/bclenet/bids-examples/tree/BEP028_heudiconv/provenance_heudiconv).

## Provenance of a BIDS dataset

Provenance of a BIDS dataset (raw, derivative, or study) SHOULD be stored inside its `dataset_description.json` file. The `dataset_description.json` file of a **BIDS raw dataset** or **BIDS study dataset** MAY include the `GeneratedBy` key to describe provenance. The `dataset_description.json` file of a **BIDS derivative dataset** MUST include the `GeneratedBy` key to describe provenance.

The `GeneratedBy` field MAY contain either of the following values:

-   Identifier(s) of the activity/activities responsible for the creation of the dataset (see [Description using identifiers](#description-using-identifiers)).
-   A description of pipelines or processes responsible for the creation of the dataset (see [Description of pipelines or processes](#description-of-pipelines-or-processes)).

### Description using identifiers

> This section details how to describe provenance of a dataset using identifiers.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This section details how to describe provenance of a dataset using identifiers.
The following fields are intended for use in `dataset_description.json` to provide provenance information that applies to the entire dataset.
```

### Software

This section specifies how to describe software packages that computed the [activities](#activities).

Each file with a `soft` suffix is a JSON file describing software. It MUST include the following key:

<!-- This block generates a metadata table.
The definitions of these fields can be found in
  src/schema/objects/metadata.yaml
and a guide for using macros can be found at
 https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/blob/master/macros_doc.md
-->
{{ MACROS___make_metadata_table(
   {
      "Software": "REQUIRED"
   }
) }}

Each object in the `Software` array includes the following keys:

<!-- This block generates a table describing subfields within a metadata field.
The definitions of these fields can be found in
  src/schema/objects/metadata.yaml
and a guide for using macros can be found at
 https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/blob/master/macros_doc.md
-->
{{ MACROS___make_subobject_table("metadata.Software.items") }}

!!! example "Example: description of a software package in a `prov/[<subdir>/]prov-<label>_soft.json` file"

    ```JSON
    {
        "Software": [
            {
                "Id": "bids::prov#dcm2niix-khhkm7u1",

>                 "AltIdentifier": ["RRID:SCR_023517"],

Reviewer 3: for software, the reason a custom id is required here, or some mutilation of RRIDs is that RRIDs are not version specific, and since in a graph sense the `Id` is the node to which properties are attached, if an RRID is used then the edges from that node would conflate all software versions used with the `Id`. if any RRID or doi is version specific, then of course that can be used as `Id`. 

`Id`'s should not merge entities unless they are the "same" from an information standpoint. for software, i would argue that provenance about version is critical and should be treated as different software agents, hence requiring different `Id`s. ideally two people using the same software version should generate the same `Id` but that would require some coordination, whereas matching could be done post-hoc.

                "Label": "dcm2niix",
                "Version": "v1.0.20220720"
            }
        ]
    }
    ```
    For a complete example, see [Provenance of DICOM to NIfTI conversion with `dcm2niix`](https://github.com/bclenet/bids-examples/tree/BEP028_dcm2niix/provenance_dcm2niix)

### Input and output data

This section specifies how to describe input and output data for [activities](#activities). This data corresponds to the W3C Prov [prov:Entity](https://www.w3.org/TR/2013/REC-prov-o-20130430/#Entity) class that includes files, datasets and other types of data.

Each file with a `ent` suffix is a JSON file describing input and output data.

!!! note

    The `ent` suffix stands for prov:Entity.

!!! warning

    These files SHOULD not describe files that are available in the dataset. See [Provenance of a BIDS file](#provenance-of-a-bids-file) for this purpose.

    These files SHOULD not describe the current dataset. See [Provenance of a BIDS dataset](#provenance-of-a-bids-dataset) for this purpose.

> Each file MUST include at least one of the following key:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Each file MUST include one or more of the following keys:
```

Please see [Citing BIDS](../introduction.md#citing-bids) on how to appropriately credit
this extension when referring to it in the context of the academic literature.

!!! example "Example datasets"

    Several [example datasets](https://bids.neuroimaging.io/datasets/examples.html#provenance)
    have been formatted using this specification and can be used
    for practical guidance when curating a new dataset.

This part of the BIDS specification is aimed at describing the provenance of a BIDS dataset.
This description is retrospective: it describes a set of steps that were executed in order to
establish the dataset and is based on [W3C PROV](https://www.w3.org/TR/2013/REC-prov-o-20130430/)
(see [Provenance from an RDF perspective](#provenance-from-a-rdf-perspective)).

Provenance information SHOULD be included in a BIDS dataset when possible.
If provenance information is included,
it MUST be described using the conventions detailed hereafter.
Provenance information reflects the provenance of a full dataset
and/or of specific files at any level of the BIDS hierarchy.
Provenance information SHOULD not include human subject identifying data.

> 

Reviewer 2: Hi @rwblair @effigies @yarikoptic, thx for the suggestion! Just discussed with @bclenet and we think we could go with:
 - Renaming the `Label` in BIDS-Prov into something else, e.g. `Name` so as to avoid confusion with bids `label` 
  - and then the update would be:
 
```suggestion

!!! Note
Throughout this document, the terms `Id` and `Name` are used to provide identification for JSON objects related to provenance.
`Id` is used to unambiguously [identify those objects](#Provenance-identifiers) that may be referenced elsewhere,
permitting automated tools to [construct and query a graph](#Provenance-graph).
`Name` is a human-readable name for that object, which need not be unique.
```

How is that?
